Showing his true colours
Dec 21st 2010, 4:43 by P.G. | CARACAS

WHEN the opposition to Hugo Chávez’s radical leftist government won a majority of votes in a legislative election this September, its leaders hoped the result would slow Venezuela’s slide towards dictatorship. But the message Mr Chávez seems to have received is that he will have to become even more authoritarian to hold power. In recent days, the president’s allies in the outgoing congress have rushed to approve a package of laws that virtually eliminate the country’s last vestiges of checks and balances and protection for civil liberties.

Shortly after Mr Chávez took office in 1999, he won approval of a new constitution with a strict division of powers and many progressive human-rights provisions. It did not take long for him to tire of such safeguards. In 2007 he proposed a “socialist” reform that would have turned Venezuela into a near-dictatorship. Voters turned it down in a referendum. But he has since managed to implement much of what was rejected, including incorporating his political militia into the military; eliminating the autonomy of the central bank; and winning a subsequent referendum to abolish term limits.

The most recent victims of Mr Chávez’s onslaught are the national parliament and local governments. Ever since his rivals unwisely boycotted a legislative election in 2005, Mr Chávez has enjoyed a rubber-stamp congress. He is taking no chances with the new parliament, which will take office on January 5th and includes a significant opposition presence. On December 17th, his allies passed an “enabling law” that will let him rule by decree on almost all significant issues for the next 18 months—rendering the new legislature a virtually irrelevant talking-shop before the new members even have a chance to warm their seats.

The president is also sidelining local governments. He has already diverted funds from state and municipal authorities for years. Now, he has undermined them entirely via five “popular power” laws establishing the socialist “commune”—a new administrative body, run by the executive, which ignores existing local boundaries—as the basic unit of government.

Mr Chávez is cracking down on civil rights as well. Finishing off their productive lame-duck session, his congressional allies will soon approve a series of bills dubbed the “Cuban package” by opponents. It includes drastic restrictions on freedom of speech, including control of the internet; an end to university autonomy; a virtual ban on the foreign funding of NGOs; and dismissal for members of the legislature wishing to switch sides. The president’s tolerance for dissent was made clear when unidentified thugs attacked students and activists who were protesting outside the parliament building against the new laws, using sticks, stones, bottles and even plastic traffic cones. None of them has been brought to justice.

Outsiders have taken note. The Inter-American Human Rights Commission said it deplored a “serious setback for freedom of expression”. The government, as is its wont, dismissed such criticism as a foreign-funded destabilisation plot. Mr Chávez has said the enabling law is necessary to respond to recent floods that have left tens of thousands homeless. It remains unclear exactly how his new special powers involving national defence or telecommunications, for example, will help re-house them.

Mr Chávez’s heavy-handed reaction to a fairly modest setback—his party will keep its legislative majority despite losing the popular vote—bodes poorly for how he might handle a loss in the 2012 presidential election. The military, he said recently, might well not tolerate an opposition government, and Venezuela’s senior general added that the armed forces were “wedded” to the chavista project.

If the president’s slow-motion coup is not enough to keep him in power, might he resort to the more traditional kind? History gives reason to worry. Mr Chávez first made his name as the leader of a failed coup in 1992. He celebrates its anniversary every year.

SAEB wrote: Dec 21st 2010 3:53 GMT

As sad as all this might be in the short run, it is actually good news for the Venezuelan people, and especially the opposition.
Keep in mind Venezuelans rank consistently among the top supporters of democracy - as per International Democracy Surveys/Barometers.
So give the opposition more ammunittion for the 2012 elections; add blatant disregard for democratic institutions to economic ruin, rampant crime and social tension.
And one thing you can always count on Venezuelans for is resourcefulness and creativity to bypass government restrictions.

Recommend (38)PermalinkReport abuse
dAvis_1 wrote: Dec 21st 2010 4:09 GMT
This is something we've seen coming for a long time. Now everybody is talking about the strong possibility that Chavez will suspend the elections in 2012, since "The Cubans" think this will be easier to deal with preemptively, rather than face the ugly situation of having to reject the election results.

Unfortunately, at this point it seems impossible that Chavez will accept defeat since he has governed completely outside the law (even the ones he taylor-made for himself) and faces nothing short than prison if he ever leaves power.

Let's hope that this time the international reaction will be such that Chavez is unable to sustain himself in power. I wonder what his nouveu radical chic supporters (Messrs. Penn, Stone, et al.) think now, after having defended him so vehemently, calling him a "democrat".

Sadly, a similar process is going on in Bolivia, where liberties are being eroded daily. The situation in Bolivia is less visible in the world, and America in particular, because Bolivia is marginal to American interests (no oil is imported from Bolivia, and the huge cocaine production now goes almost entirely to Brazil). However, Mr. Garcia Linera, the real power in Bolivia behind the failed hope of Evo Morales, pursues other tactics, having learned from the chavista fumbles. The government is using the judicial system to take back all the offices lost to the opposition in the last elections, forcing many potential opposition candidates out of office, many of them going out of the country to avoid jail, which seems to be the only rational option in a place where no due process exists.

In the meantime, the Vicepresident, himself convicted in the '90s for terrorism , armed robbery, and other unsavory actions under a democratic government, calls them "criminals" and demands that they return and "prove their innocence" disregarding completely the universal right to presumption of innocence.

Alvaro Garcia Linera called himself in the last inauguration "an old bolchevic" despite being only 48 years old and unmarried. He is an fanatic follower of Gramsci, and is always reminding everybody that he owns 25,000 books. After his stint as a "terrorist" now only dresses in the finest fashions and is said to have accumulated a fortune...

After all, that's what they all really want: Power and money. The "Social Movements" can wait...

Recommend (46)PermalinkReport abuse
hopelessvenezuela wrote: Dec 22nd 2010 12:19 GMT
It´s really sad! not to mention his love with Iran´s leader and others of the same kind

Recommend (31)PermalinkReport abuse
Anjin-San wrote: Dec 22nd 2010 5:49 GMT
So, when will Hugo change his first name to Fidel or Adolf?

Recommend (26)PermalinkReport abuse
Thom1274 wrote: Dec 22nd 2010 3:38 GMT
We need Sean Penn to go down there and straighten things out.

Recommend (27)PermalinkReport abuse
Georges Sand wrote: Dec 22nd 2010 7:58 GMT
I wish that i could maintain such optimism as SAEB wrote. Up until recently I was more optimistic, but the truth is that the world at large does not care what this dictator does as long as he spends our money on them. Shame on the OAS and Unasur for not calling a spade a spade and allowing this "democratic farse" to continue. It will ultimately be up the the Venezuelan people to choose their fate, hopefully without the use of firepower, although unlikely Mr. Chavez will go without a strong fight.

Recommend (25)PermalinkReport abuse
MP Caracas wrote: Dec 22nd 2010 9:38 GMT
Much of what Chávez does, and gets away with, has to do with a so-called "International community" that gets more and more pragmatic every day and prefers to look the other way in order not to jeopardise steady oil supplies, in the case of the tiny island republics of the Caribbean or Central American nations a supply of truly a vital nature usually accompanied with overly generous selling conditions that will guarantee support in, say, OAS decisions thereby rendering that regional entity little more than an adornment. By that I don't mean that Venezuelans look at the show from the galleries whilst that International community gets involved every time Mr Chávez disregards the will of the people as expressed in electoral ballots, which of late he has taken to do more and more as the article quite correctly states. But with a complacent EU that looks sympathetically on him because of a shared anti-americanism that Europeans seem to carry in their blood and the complicity of other South American nations like Brazil or Argentina that rather miopically seem to place nice business deals before any other consideration whilst Mr Chávez meddles impudically into their internal affairs in his efforts to export his so-called 21st century socialism, plus an United States that because of being busy somewhere else has placed its neighbours way back into its list of concerns, Chávez moves at ease and Venezuelans, who historically led democratic initiatives in the sub-continent, see themselves as left alone. With all powers of government firmly in Chávez's hold, the reasonably foreseeable prospects of venezuelans look bleak indeed. Yes, we have been left alone.

Recommend (25)PermalinkReport abuse
MIGEULH020 wrote: Dec 22nd 2010 11:13 GMT
I AM A VENEZUELAN ...AND TO ME NOW IS THE HOUR FOR THE WORLD TO DO SOMETHING ABOUT THIS DICTATOR.STOP LOOKING AT THE MONEY ,OIL AND GASOLINE WE GIVE YOU PEOPLE ...AND START LOOKING AT THE VENEZUELAN PEOPLE ...HE DID GET TO THE PRESIDENCY WIYH VOTES BUTHE IS NOT ACTING AS A DEMORATIC PRESIDENT.. SO YOU THE SO CALL DEMOCRATIC GOBERMENTS OF THE WORLD TO DO SOMETHING NOW..........THANK YOU AND FORGIVE MY ENGLISH

Recommend (27)PermalinkReport abuse
Sinsonte wrote: Dec 23rd 2010 3:16 GMT
Thank you for a good, concise, and unbiased article. It is, however, missing one important tidbit that relates to the 2007 referendum to ammend the Constitution and which you correctly inform he lost. The Law in Venezuela (until that moment, that is) states that any initiative that is brought to the people for referendum and is voted down may not be brought before the voters again during the legislative period during which it was introduced, including its discussion in congress. Chavez sidestepped that obstacle by having congress approve another "enabling law" which he used to pass laws that included many of the things the voters did not agree with. And for those really familiar with Venezuela, I submit Chavez' words on a nationally televised address to the nation, surrounded by the High Command (the heads of the armed forces and its Chief of Staff) when he referred to the opposions win as a ,,,,, win. That is what he thinks of the opposition and democracy in general.

Recommend (20)PermalinkReport abuse
GioVite wrote: Dec 23rd 2010 1:45 GMT
The real issue isn't so much Chavez as it is Cuba. Cuba uses Chavez as its puppet to subsidize its failing economy and sees Venezuela as its sponsor. Chavez enjoys a set of body guards from the Cuban G2 courtesy of Castro who has taught him well in the art of Stalinist style repression. the infiltration of Cuban elements in Venezuelan, Bolivian, Ecuadorian, and Nicaraguan governments is deep and will be sustained so long as there is a puppet master in Havana leading all actions. A regime change policy in Cuba with the aim of eradicating the last vestiges of world Stalinism is the only answer to the Venezuelan dictator. Neither the OAS nor UN will step in, and the locals will be repressed to no avail. Chavez is turning in a Fidel. The answer is simple, cut the head of the snake and the body will die.

Recommend (25)PermalinkReport abuse
alfred_e_neuman wrote: Dec 23rd 2010 3:53 GMT
Heil Chavez! The night of the red shirts approaches. We are close to a final solution for the traidor oligarchs, the bourgeois and the "escualidos". Down with the evil Empire of the gringos. Heil Chavez! The world supports us, our abundant natural resources help turn their heads the other way. The timely briefcases filled with dollar bills will continue to deliver to Argentina, Bolivia, Nicaragua and many other allies ensure the loyalty of our clients. Cuba depends on us, Venezuela depends on Cuba. We cannot fail now. Our Fifth Republic will last a thousand years! Heil Chavez.

Recommend (19)PermalinkReport abuse
MP Caracas wrote: Dec 23rd 2010 7:08 GMT
Much of what Chávez does, and gets away with, has to do with a so-called "International community" that gets more and more pragmatic every day and prefers to look the other way in order not to jeopardise steady oil supplies, in the case of the tiny island republics of the Caribbean or Central American nations a supply of truly a vital nature usually accompanied with overly generous selling conditions that will guarantee support in, say, OAS decisions thereby rendering that regional entity little more than an adornment. By that I don't mean that Venezuelans look at the show from the galleries whilst that International community gets involved every time Mr Chávez disregards the will of the people as expressed in electoral ballots, which of late he has taken to do more and more as the article quite correctly states. But with a complacent EU that looks sympathetically on him because of a shared anti-americanism that Europeans seem to carry in their blood and the complicity of other South American nations like Brazil or Argentina that rather miopically seem to place nice business deals before any other consideration whilst Mr Chávez meddles impudically into their internal affairs in his efforts to export his so-called 21st century socialism, plus an United States that because of being busy somewhere else has placed its neighbours way back into its list of concerns, Chávez moves at ease and Venezuelans, who historically led democratic initiatives in the sub-continent, see themselves as left alone. With all powers of government firmly in Chávez's hold, the reasonably foreseeable prospects of venezuelans look bleak indeed. Yes, we have been left alone.

Recommend (17)PermalinkReport abuse
valwayne wrote: Dec 24th 2010 11:53 GMT
The Economist is really slow to catch on! Its been obvious for years now that Hugo Chavez has made himself the absolute dictator of Venezuela, and while allowing some trappings of democracy would never permit a real challenge to his abolute power. Not only is he the absolute dictator of Venezuela, but he is seeking to cement his power through an alliance with Iran that will give him intermediate range missiles and nuclear warheads! And he is seeking to export his dictatorship to other nations in Latin America by funneling money to other nations to undermine their democracies as the WikiLeaks documents showed! Obama and the International community are failing Democracy, failing world security, and worst of all failing the people of Venezuala and Latin America by allowing this tyrant to continue and export his tyrany!

Recommend (15)PermalinkReport abuse
corgon1 wrote: Dec 25th 2010 3:26 GMT
Even though the situation in Venezuela is worrying, I do not think it can be contained for much longer. Even though Venezuela has oil, it is a deep sulphuric oil that is very expensive to refine. Venezuela does not have the money to wipe its own ass, let alone invest in infrastructure products. Additionally, if one reads bloomberg, one sees that Venezuela is one step from defaulting on its sovereign debt (based on swap prices), nationalized companies are consistently under-performing, and inflation is set to close this year at 20%. Either Venezuela will go the way of Zimbabwe and have a true popular revolution (remember what happened to Moussolini), or Brazil, Colombia, and Argentina will have to step in and slove this problem (as it presents a national security issue for these countries). Chavez either knows that his time is up (or coming quickly to an end), and if he does then he deserves what is coming to him. Who do you think will come to his aid - Morales, Ahmedinajad, Kadafi, Castro. All of these people are beggars themselves, who are facing a similar situation. As for the generals of Venezuela, one will see how quickly they will turn if they feel that the ICC, UN, or the US is coming after them.

Recommend (20)PermalinkReport abuse
Joseph76 wrote: Dec 25th 2010 10:09 GMT
After reading all comments I still think the only creativ e one is the first one from SAEB (all others it is just a spit to the situation) Venezuelans (Chavistas and opposition) are democracy loving people who have use democratic channels time and again to reflect their political views (Yes, 45% of the country likes Chves 11 years later!). The main point here, if the Venezuelan situation deteriorates more and the opposition is able to form a wide spectrum of political parties an capitalize the national feeling of change under one carismatic leader, that leader should appeal to a national consensus vote and particularly to the Chavistas base (35%) and Undecided voters (20%) who will wake up one mornning and say "f...it i am tired of this guy and as I voted him in, I will vote him out". All the efforts should be concentrated in supporting an already large and better than before organized opposition. Venezuela is still a democracy, all of the elections have been clean and respected by the gov't so far, if they try a coup or to cheat during next elections the military will be divided and the whole Chavista enterprise will be tear down (an election cheat will be followed by an internal military coup). Forget about Brazil, Argentina, Fidel's defunct grandmother, OEA, etc....they won't help...this is an issue of Venezuelans...if the elections are rigged the 5 MM + opposition voters should take on to the streets....you can't just kill 5 MM souls right?

Recommend (17)PermalinkReport abuse
DukezofWater wrote: Dec 27th 2010 5:41 GMT
The reason Chavez is putting Venezuela on a path towards dictatorship is because he wants to stay in power. However, in my opinion, this won't work especially because he doesn't have the support of the people. Without consensus, the totalitarian government will eventually fail. Also, with the United States being in fairly close proximity to Venezuela, dictatorship will not happen. Even if Chavez will succeed in transforming the government, it will fail. To fix this problem, the UN or even NGOs should implement rule of law and a new system of checks and balances; restricting the power of the president and only allowing legislature to be passed based on popular vote. The path to dictatorship is a cause of corruption.

Recommend (19)PermalinkReport abuse
dAvis_1 wrote: Dec 27th 2010 1:59 GMT
"...Venezuela is still a democracy, all of the elections have been clean and respected by the gov't so far..."

Really, Joseph76?

- Creating new administrative boundaries (now in the new form of "communes" in order to oust oppositions leaders, as was the case of the mayor of Caracas is respecting elections?
- Passing a "law" to govern by decree and thus avoid the check of the newly elected parliamente is democracy?

The fact is that the stage is setting precisely to create a countermeasure against losing a national election. Chavez has gone "all in" and he will not go of his own accord.

And that is certainly not a democracy.

Recommend (18)PermalinkReport abuse
SF-NY wrote: Dec 30th 2010 2:23 GMT
As bad as the situation is, it is very difficult to say what the international community should do. If the US takes any overt action and fails, it will only solidify Chavez's rule, just as the Bay of Pigs gave Castro more control over Cuba than he ever could have had, as he had only to remind them of the dreaded yankees just over their horizon to justify his control. However, relying on domestic opposition to rise up against a military that he has loaded with his goons is also a dangerous gamble. If he does cancel elections, it will be difficult for the US or OAS to put sanctions into place given the oil situation. Possible for the US, (although costly) unlikely for anyone else. What could the UN possibly do? The security council will never back anything, as China buys Chaves' oil and Russia sells him obsolete weapons. Has the general assembly ever accomplished anything that interferes with a countries sovereignty? The hope must be for economics, as many readers have pointed out, his epic mis-management of an oil-rich country may do the dirty work for everyone, as he may run out of cash to bribe people into supporting him. If not, it's not out of the question for him to provoke Columbia again with all his border nonsense. Maybe if the economy is really bad or he cancels the election, he might try to distract everyone with an outside conflict. If Columbia routes his pathetic army, the opposition might be able to rise up without as big of a worry about any troops quelling the uprising. There's always hope.
