More sense than money
Christie's and Sotheby's face buyer resistance
Jun 25th 2010 | From The Economist online


THE two leading auction houses, Sotheby’s and Christie’s, have come a long way since the dark days of late 2008, when the sudden collapse of the art market caused their revenues to plummet. At the time, they were forced to pay out nearly $200m in guarantees to honour contracts on works that had been consigned to auction, yet failed to sell on the day. Now, two years later, the sector is running ahead of itself. As the art-market recovery gets under way, auction houses now face a particularly delicate moment.

When art prices fell, auction houses struggled to attract sellers. Collectors faced with death, divorce or debt—three common reasons for selling—still consigned their works for auction. But discretionary selling fell back sharply. With the memory of the record prices of 2007 still fresh in many collectors’ minds, the question they asked themselves was “why sell if you don’t have to?”

There was still plenty of money out there, though, and the best works continued to achieve high prices. The world record for a work of art sold at auction was broken in early February 2010, when a sculpture by Alberto Giacometti sold for $104.3m (including commission and taxes) at Sotheby’s in London. Three months later this record was broken again when Christie’s in New York sold the beautiful, rare 1932 Picasso from the Brody collection for $106.5m. For the very wealthiest buyers, near-zero interest rates and falling stock markets served only to increase the attraction of art as an alternative asset for their investments.

To entice collectors to part with their best works, auction houses have been making increasingly extravagant claims about what they might deliver. They have returned to offering potential sellers all sorts of financial inducements—guarantees, third-party financing and irrevocable bids—less than two years after saying they would probably never venture down that road again.

In light of recent record-breaking prices, some consignors have grown greedy and auctioneers over-confident. This week, at the Impressionist and Modern sales in London, it looked as if all of the market's hard-earned lessons had been forgotten.

Confident that Impressionist works, in particular, would prove attractive to Russian and Far Eastern buyers, Christie’s and Sotheby’s were happily telling anyone who'd listen before the sales that the two main evening auctions, on June 22nd and 23rd, could very well be their biggest auctions ever. In the event, Christie’s sale was its biggest in London, but both fell well short of even the lowest estimates.

Sotheby’s went first and, despite the spin it tried to put on the result afterwards, had the worst time of it. Before a stellar crowd that included Laurence Graff, a London jeweller specialising in huge diamonds, and Larry Gagosian, a New York art dealer who has become a lynchpin of the late Picasso market, nearly a third of the works failed to find a buyer. Steven Cohen, an American hedge-fund billionaire, sent his advisor to oversee the sale of Edouard Manet’s 1878/79 self-portrait, which he consigned and which Sotheby’s featured on the cover of the catalogue. Mr Cohen had bought the picture privately from Steve Wynn, a Las Vegas casino owner, a decade earlier for a figure believed to be between $35m and $40m. Sotheby’s estimated it could fetch £30m ($43.4m).

The portrait features a gloomy Manet painted in beiges, browns and blacks with an oddly unfinished left hand holding his paintbrush. It could barely be described as an Impressionist work, so closely does it resemble a classic portrait of the 19th century. In the event, the picture received a single, tentative bid for £20m from Franck Giraud, a French-born New York dealer and director of Giraud Pissarro Segalot, which deals in 19th- and 20th-century art. That figure was the minimum Mr Cohen would accept. Having seen Mr Giraud putting his hand up, the auctioneer brought down his hammer; Mr Cohen learned the hard way that his provenance does not necessarily add value.

Christie’s also faced difficulties the following night with one of its star lots, Claude Monet’s “Nymphéas”, dating from 1906. Encouraged by the record £40.9m that Andrey Melnichenko, a young Russian tycoon, paid exactly two years earlier for another, later work from the same series, Christie’s set the estimate at £30m-40m. This, despite the fact that the later painting, sold in 2008, had been twice as long, more colourful and in far better condition. “The consignor just got greedy,” one dealer said afterwards. Four buyers expressed interest in the painting. The auctioneer opened the bidding at £22m, but no one would go beyond £29m, so the painting was returned to the seller. This failure will taint its prospects, probably for at least a decade

Collectors crowded the sales, but just as easily they sat on their hands—and then slipped away.