Message in a bottle
An auction of Chinese snuff bottles surprises the experts
Jun 9th 2010 | From The Economist online


Embed info
IN A time when the market for Chinese treasures is constantly breaking records, the success of the sale of George and Mary Bloch’s snuff bottles in Hong Kong still caught many off-guard. The May 28th event marked the first so-called “golden gavel” sale in Hong Kong for Bonhams, a London auctioneer, meaning every lot found a buyer (also known as a “white-glove” auction in Europe and America). This is rare, and often limited to sales with few lots in highly collectible sectors. That this was a niche auction with 141 lots makes the feat all the more remarkable.

The sale's final tally, at just over HK$66m ($8.5m), was three times higher than Bonhams expected. This has surely encouraged the sellers, who are planning to dispose of their entire 1,700-piece collection in a further nine sales over the next five years.

Chinese snuff bottles, from the mid-18th century on, tend to be made from precious materials, such as jade, ivory, lacquer, porcelain, bronze, silver, enamel, jet, rock crystal and rhinoceros horn. Air-tight with little ivory spoons, they became common among the Chinese because Western-style snuff boxes, so fashionable in England and France from the late 17th century on, proved unsuitable for the warm, muggy climate of the East. They were often given as gifts, some with symbolic meaning—homonyms in praise of fertility or children, for example—and much care went into their craftsmanship. Like Japanese netsuke, snuff bottles were designed as hand-held treasures.

George Bloch was an Austrian-born factory owner who was educated in England. At the Anschluss in 1938, his family fled Austria for China, and he settled in Shanghai. His company manufactured watch movements and eventually bought the European trademark for Ingersoll, the world’s leading watchmaking company.

Bloch began buying snuff bottles in the 1960s and 1970s, long before they became popular among collectors. He sought advice from Hugh Moss, a leading British dealer of oriental works, and pursued only the best quality. It was Mr Moss, now based in Thailand, who advised the Bloch family to sell the collection after its patriarch died a year ago.

Mr Moss recommended Bonhams for the sale, in part to keep the costs down. Having written a seven-volume catalogue of the Bloch collection himself, he believed Bonhams could do without an expensive printed catalogue. By marketing the snuff bottles online, the auction house would seriously reduce the costs associated with the sale.

The auction drew dealers from Hong Kong, Singapore, Taiwan, Tokyo, Australia, California, Florida and New York, and gathered together some of the best known names in the business, in particular such dealers as Mr Moss, Robert Chang from Hong Kong and Clare and Michael Chu from Los Angeles. More important was the presence of dealers and collectors from the mainland, where a passion for snuff bottles has lagged behind demand for imperial jade and porcelain.

Lot 8 offered the first serious excitement. A translucent white bottle overlaid with swirls of blue and decorated with an undulating white dragon, its carver was clearly a master of the medium. “On an ‘Ooomph’ scale of one to ten,” the catalogue stated, “this is an emphatic, unquestionable, unanimous ten (and we briefly considered 11).” Estimated at HK$220,000-350,000, bidding soared past its top estimate and sold for HK$580,000 (HK$672,000 with commission and taxes) to Mr Chang in the room, a record for a glass-overlay bottle. Mr Chang also bought Lot 77, an imperial Beijing enamel bottle richly decorated with flowers, which had once belonged to Martin Schoen, a notable American collector, and his daughter, Belle Schoen. The enamel carried a top estimate of HK$2.5m but sold for HK$4.2m.

Lot 27, a famille rose porcelain moonflask, was attractive not just for the delicate painted landscape decoration, which has been attributed to Tang Ying, but because it still had its ivory spoon wrapped with imperial yellow silk, proof that this bottle was hardly used before being stored in the imperial collection. Estimated at HK$1.4-2m, the moonflask sold to a private Hong Kong collector in the room for HK$4m.

“Cherish stone as if it were gold” is a common declaration among collectors who prize interesting stones. Made of a single piece of nephrite, Lot 140 was remarkable. The carver managed to create a subtle rocky landscape in which an elderly scholar walks past a lotus pond while another scholar is poised with his brush in the air, having just inscribed the rock face with the characters shi ru jin (“stone prized like gold”). Mr Chang and Mr Moss bid back and forth, with Mr Moss ultimately winning the piece for $HK6m, three times the top estimate. He proved the most energetic bidder at the sale, buying half the lots and spending well over HK$30m.

But he was not able to secure the top lot, 129, despite having owned the bottle twice before, in 1981 and again in 1986. Enamel work on copper is extremely rare, as was the decoration of a European-looking woman with a young curly-haired boy who peeks out from behind her basket of flowers. Estimated at HK$1.8-3m, this snuff bottle attracted six serious bidders. Mr Chang dropped out at HK$7m, leaving the field wide open to two buyers from mainland China, Kevin Tien bidding in the front row on behalf of a client on the telephone and another private collector in the room, who finally secured the piece for HK$9.3m, one of five pieces he bought that day.