SONO UN VENEZIANO


Venice is in peril and so are we. Maybe some pizza will help, writes Robert Butler in his latest Going Green column ...

From INTELLIGENT LIFE Magazine, Autumn 2010

It looks like easy money. You mix flour with water, add cheese and tomato and throw it on a hot stone. For the first 1,500 years you didn’t need to add the tomato because it had yet to reach Europe from Peru. Even with the extra toppings now available—the jalapeños, pepperoni and pineapple chunks—the cost of the ingredients is only a fraction of the price. No one seems bothered by this. Pizzas are the most popular dish in America. October is National Pizza Month in the United States, but sales peak during the National Football League play-offs at the start of the year. If you marvel at the profit margin on these millions and millions of pizzas, you can always choose one that sends some of the money to a good cause.

In November 1966 a dry hard sirocco wind from the Sahara blew up the Adriatic, driving the water north along towards Venice. The wind combined with a rainstorm and the gravitational pull of a full moon to raise the high tide five feet higher than normal. The damage was enormous. A fund was set up soon after for the preservation of art and archives which, a year later, became known as the Venice in Peril fund.

Ten years after that, the fund received an unusual boost when Peter Boizot, the founder of Britain’s Pizza Express, put a new pizza on his menu called the Veneziana. It cost 90p and 5p went to the fund. (A glass of house wine in those days was 45p.) Today the Veneziana costs £6.85 and 25p gets split between Venice in Peril and the restoration of buildings in Britain built before 1750. So far, Venice in Peril has received nearly £2m.

Of course, pizzas come from Naples not Venice, and Naples has received European Union trademark status to defend its heritage. The recipe for this slightly bogus Venetian pizza comes from a savoury marinade in the Middle Ages (so the Pizza Express cookbook tells us) which used onions, white wine, vinegar, sugar, raisins and pine kernels. You may only be looking at toppings of olives, onions, capers, sultanas and pine kernels, but that combination has paid for 46 conservation and restoration projects ranging from the Porta della Carta at the Doge’s Palace to the Capella Emiliani on the cemetery island of San Michele.

There are academic initiatives too: a conference, a  research fellowship at Churchill College, Cambridge, and a book, “The Science of Saving Venice”. But the dangers of sinking and flooding persist. Every painting in Venice is threatened by the bigger picture. Venice is part of the African geological plate that is moving north and nudging under the European one, forcing the Alps to rise and Venice to sink. Melting ice caps and warmer sea temperatures are raising the level of the coastal lagoon, the largest wetland in Italy. Only two inches above normal high tide, St Mark’s Square used to flood four times a year. Now scientists are predicting, not very precisely, that by the end of the century it will flood between 30 and 250 times a year. What Napoleon called the drawing room of Europe may become its swimming pool. The BBC recently reported two details that stick in the mind. The first, no one in Venice lives on the ground floor any more. The second, you can buy wellington boots from ice-cream vendors.

John F. Kennedy famously caught the spirit of the age in 1963 when he said, “Ich bin ein Berliner.” Now may be the moment for Barack Obama to announce, “Sono un Veneziano.” For we are all Venetians now. And not just the inhabitants of the coastal mega-cities—Mumbai, Lagos, Tokyo or Buenos Aires—or those in Bangladesh or on the Pacific islands of Kiribati or Tuvalu. I also mean the other diners at my local Pizza Express in west London. If you look it up on the map the Environment Agency has devised, you will see it is in one of the areas most vulnerable to flooding. Water follows the natural contours of the land: go five miles farther east, and it’s not looking good for the Pizza Expresses closest to the homes of the Queen and the prime minister. From Great Yarmouth and Cambridge to Doncaster and Tewkesbury, there are plenty of towns that deserve their own pizza in peril.

These are times that call for a new pizza. This one would have variety, mystery and surprise. Its recipe would never be fixed. Its ingredients would be seasonal and locally sourced. No need to itemise the environmental benefits that would flow from this. The equation is simple: the more land given over to local farming, the more local produce grown in and around cities, the greater the resilience to flooding. There would be no need to give away half of 25p. It would be doing something in itself. What we need is a pizza regionale con produzione agricola di zona. All it needs is a shorter name: the pizza di zona.  
 

(Robert Butler, a former theatre critic, blogs on the arts and the environment at the Ashden Directory, which he edits. His last piece for Intelligent Life was on V.S. Naipaul)

Picture credit: mccun934 (via Flickr)

Ideas  AUTUMN 2010  Food & Drink  GOING GREEN  Intelligence  Issues and ideas   Subscribe to Intelligent Life and get powerful writing, provocative opinions and memorable photography delivered to your door every quarter