WINE, DINE, RECLINE


Heading for wine country? Better book in for the night. Rosanna de Lisle picks hotels for oenophiles ...

From INTELLIGENT LIFE Magazine, Autumn 2010

For anyone who loves a glass of wine or four and doesn’t want to count the units, wine hotels make perfect sense: lovely places to stay, lodged deep in wine country, with scores of neighbouring vineyards to visit by day and their own (often very booked-up) gastronomic restaurants to try at night. And although the sommelier will no doubt encourage you to explore the wine list with gusto, these hotels are not all about toxification: most have spas for the morning after.

Les Sources de Caudalie, France
Nowhere will you be more steeped in wine than at this soothing 49-room hotel near Bordeaux. Grapes are everywhere: growing on the famed terroir of the parent estate, Château Smith Haut Lafitte; turned into Grand Cru vintages then served in the Michelin-starred restaurant and the bistro; and slathered over guests in the original Vinothérapie spa, which turns wine-making’s waste products—pips, skins, yeast—into Merlot wraps and Cabernet scrubs. Doubles from €202, room only.

The Yeatman, Portugal
Oporto is the home of port and now one of its oldest producers—Taylor, Fladgate & Yeatman, founded in 1692—has built a hotel amid the port lodges on the south bank of the Douro. Set in seven acres of gardens, The Yeatman has 82 airy rooms with balconies, a decanter-shaped pool, a croquet lawn (like port itself, the hotel is an Anglo-Portuguese fusion), a Vinothérapie spa (Caudalie again), a restaurant and a cellar stocked with up to 25,000 bottles from all over the world. Doubles from €185, b&b.

Farmhouse Inn, Restaurant and Spa, California
The 18-room Farmhouse in Sonoma County is run with devotion by siblings Joe and Catherine Bartolomei, whose family ranch supplies much of the produce and some of the wine (the long, international list is chosen by the county’s only master sommelier) for the Michelin-starred restaurant. Rooms are cosy in the old workers’ cottages, spacious in the new barn. There are wine tastings and 75 wineries within ten miles. Detox in the simple but serene spa. Doubles from $306, b&b. Restaurant: dinner only Thur-Mon.

Hotel Marqués de Riscal, Spain 
In Rioja is a hotel tangled in ribbons of titanium and stainless steel by Frank Gehry. It’s part of a complex with the Marqués de Riscal winery (the oldest in the region), two restaurants (dishes range from ancestral to chemistry-lab experimental), a Vinothérapie spa and cellars ageing 7m bottles. There are 43 very sleek rooms; ask for one in the main building if you like your views framed by flying metal tresses. Doubles from €297, b&b.

The Louise, Australia
A Californian couple, Jim and Helen Carreker, spent ten years searching for the optimum spot in Australia to open a wine hotel. They finally settled on the Barossa Valley in South Australia, where they remodelled a tired but prettily situated hotel into The Louise. While the food and wine in the much-lauded Appellation restaurant are the primary draw, the 15 rooms are swish suites with spa-like bathrooms, private terraces overlooking vineyards and, in some cases, outdoor showers. Doubles from AU$429, b&b. 

 

(Rosanna de Lisle writes on travel for the Daily Telegraph. She is a former arts editor of the Independent on Sunday. Her last piece for Intelligent Life magazine was about beach-side properties for rent.)

Illustration:  Patrick Morgan

Lifestyle  AUTUMN 2010  Food & Drink  quarters  Wine   Subscribe to Intelligent Life and get powerful writing, provocative opinions and memorable photography delivered to your door every quarter