THE MISSION: SKIN DEEP


Doing a tattoo can’t be that hard, can it? Will Smith finds out, with help from a dead pig ...

From INTELLIGENT LIFE Magazine, Autumn 2010

I have a prejudice against tattoos. I associate them with prisons and docks, places I don’t want to be, while the imagery references death and pain, things I want to avoid. Plus I am terrible at drawing. This is not an issue if my shoddy stickmen are limping across someone else’s Post-it notes. But their arm? What if some Russian gangster wants a tattoo of a wolf with a Kalashnikov between its paws? I’ll be leaving the premises on my hands and knees, begging for my life.

Luckily, when I arrive at the Family Business tattoo parlour in east London, I’m given a roll of pig skin to practise on. Unfurled, this has a rough texture but still looks uncomfortably close to human skin, and makes me feel I’m in a scene from one of the “Saw” movies. Still, the pig isn’t going to ask for a refund—nor put a bounty on my head when it finds I’ve climbed out of the toilet window after incising it with a wobbly dagger piercing a malformed heart.

My teacher is Mo Coppoletta, a tattoo artist so renowned that people fly across the world to wear his work. His is a bespoke service. Asking him to tattoo you with a sinograph or the Rolling Stones’ logo would be akin to asking David Hockney to paint your bathroom. Mo tells me that great tattooists have a complete sense of artistry. They create the design—known as a stencil—they execute it, and no two tattoos of theirs are the same. They are effectively commissioned painters, working on human skin. Not, as you might have thought, just grown-up versions of the sort of kids who stabbed the art teacher with a broken brush.

Mo is mildly disdainful about most tattoos he sees on the street, which he thinks are poor in concept and execution. (He must feel happier in winter, when young men hide their wonky Celtic armbands under jumpers.) But then the only way to learn tattooing is on the job—some will buy a tattoo machine and a book of stencils and do it by numbers, whereas others spend years honing their technique and developing their own style. The trouble is, I’m not an artist. Mo’s walls are adorned with stencils of tattoos recently done or waiting to be inked. Japanese gods, Virgin Marys, swirling fruit and flowers. Clear, detailed, perfectly proportioned, and way beyond me.

I want to impress Mo by thinking of a unique design. How would I sum up my essence in a tattoo? All I can think of is “Charlotte Brontë 4 Ever”. Thankfully a bespoke tattoo is deemed outside of my skillset and instead Mo hands over a book of stencils. Opting for a winged skull on a dice, I copy the design onto tracing paper, then feed it into a thermal-copier machine, which prints my drawing onto carbon transfer paper. I smooth down the transfer on the moistened pig flesh and peel it off, leaving a purpley-blue outline. So far, so GCSE art. I’m actually back within my comfort zone.

And I’m straight back out of it as I dip a needle in a tiny pot of ink, then hold it against a slab of animal carcass. Activating a motor in the needle by pushing on a footpad, I start the lining work, Mo urging me to make “long, fluid movements”. This is difficult as the needle tends to spew ink all over the area you’re working in, obscuring the outline you’re following. So you need a good memory and a sense of perspective. I’ve got the first, but not the second, and some of my skull’s teeth look a bit wonky. But how many skeletons have you seen with perfect dentistry?

I wipe away the excess ink using surgical soap—and am swamped by waves of relief as I see the unmistakable outline of a winged skull on a dice. Using a wider-tipped needle, I spend another ten minutes shading in the eye socket and the feathers. I’m starting to feel quite cocky—until, much as you’d tell a child they’re not allowed to carry the tea-tray, Mo tells me he won’t let me use any colours. Beginners like me have to stick to getting the edges right. As with clothes, black hides a multitude of sins.

Mo is grudgingly impressed—with the caveat that a slice of pig doesn’t prepare you for inking a design on the contours of a limb attached to a living human, probably howling at my heavy needlework. They won’t let me near a customer, probably for my own safety. So I’m looking for volunteers. All you need is a high pain threshold, a keen sense of forgiveness, and—given my talents—the ability to shed your skin.

 

(Will Smith is an actor and comic who appears in the film "In the Loop". In the last issue he debunked roadie myths.)

Picture Credit: David Yeo

Lifestyle  AUTUMN 2010  THE MISSION   Subscribe to Intelligent Life and get powerful writing, provocative opinions and memorable photography delivered to your door every quarter