Wild Weather: Rain, Snow Wreak Havoc Along West Coast
Digging Out and Cleaning Up Are How Many Across the Country Will Be Welcoming the New Year

2 comments By LEEZEL TANGLAO
Dec. 30, 2010

West Coast residents are mopping up today from another round of extreme weather that brought strong winds and heavy rain Wednesday to Southern California and blizzard conditions in Arizona.


MORE VIDEO
    

Parts of Montana, Wyoming, New Mexico and Arizona are under blizzard warnings this morning, and some areas can expect more than a foot of snow as the storm moves into Colorado.

Southern California residents are still recovering from the last week's storm that brought nearly a year's worth of rain in a week.

Cold wind gusts of more than 40 mph slammed into Los Angeles County Wednesday, the Associated Press reported.

Motorists faced downed trees and rolling tumbleweeds resulting from strong winds on Southern California highways and a mudslide closed parts of the 91 freeway at the Riverside County border, according to the California Highway Patrol.

Local engineers are warning communities of the threat of more mudslides and flooding.

In the San Bernardino County town of Highland, homes were already buried in mud from last week's storms.

Authorities have been working non-stop to prevent more injuries and property damages.

"The idea was to sandbag to keep flowing water today from entering homes ... trying to keep them from being double victims," Cal Fire Spokesman Bill Peters said.

Several mountain roads were shut down after storm-related accidents snarled traffic.


Officials closed parts of Highway 330 after sections of roadway collapsed.

"The roads are inundated no matter which way you come up to the mountains right now," Caltrans spokeswoman Terri Kasinga told ABC News Los Angeles affiliate KABC. "We have snow, we have tourists coming up, we've got some closures going on, so if you're coming up to the mountain, bring your chains, bring extra supplies, water, blankets and patience."

In Northern California, an oak tree crashed into Gayle Falgoust's camping tent, officials said.

She was killed but her seven-year-old granddaughter next to her survived.

"It was so stormy and windy. It was just a very cruel winter day," Safari West spokeswoman Aphrodite Caserta told the Associated Press.

As a result of the storms, California's acting governor, Abel Maldonado, sent a letter to President Obama requesting a disaster declaration for the state.

While the rain and snow has moved on in California, cold temperatures and strong winds remain in the storm's wake.

A wind warning has been issued for tonight into early morning for the passes and canyons near Los Angeles, where near-hurricane strength winds are possible.

Blizzard Conditions in Arizona
In northern Arizona, the storm dumped heavy rain and snow and left motorists stranded on a major north-south highway between Flagstaff and the Phoenix area Wednesday.

Authorities closed Interstate 17 after several truck crashes resulting from the snow, the Arizona Republic reported.

The National Weather Service issued a winter storm warning and freeze watch for parts of the state.