Magnitude 4.2 earthquake rattles N Central Indiana

By CHARLES WILSON Associated Press
7:32 a.m. CST, December 30, 2010

chi-ap-in-indianaearthquake
INDIANAPOLIS —
A magnitude 4.2 earthquake shook portions of central Indiana on Thursday, prompting a wave of calls to local authorities from rattled residents. 

The U.S. Geological Survey said on its website that the quake, which was about three miles deep, occurred at 7:55 a.m. EST Thursday and was centered about five miles south of Greentown in Howard County, about 15 miles east-southeast of Kokomo. The epicenter was about 50 miles north-northeast of Indianapolis. 

The USGS said the quake was felt by people as far away as Illinois, Ohio, Kentucky and Wisconsin. Geophysicist Randy Baldwin said a quake of that magnitude would feel like a loaded truck passing by. No damage was immediately reported, and Baldwin said he didn't expect any. 

Gabrielle Sauce, a Noblesville businesswoman, told The Indianapolis Star she was sitting on her couch when the quake hit. 

Chicago Shopping Overwhelming Offers: Always 50% off or more from your favorite brands >>

"The house began to rattle and shake. It lasted probably 5 to 7 seconds," she told the Star. 

Howard County Chief Sheriff's Deputy Steve Rogers said the department was bombarded by phone calls after the quake from people wondering if there had been an explosion. He said some people reported hearing a loud boom. 

Baldwin said such booms are fairly common. 

Indiana University geologist Michael Hamburger told Indianapolis television station WTHR that the temblor occurred in an area "that's seismically very quiet." 

Baldwin agreed. There are no known fault lines in the area where the quake was centered, he said. "This is pretty unusual for the area," he said. 

Baldwin said two quakes had been reported within 60 miles of the epicenter in years past, including a 3.8 quake in 2004 and a 3.0 quake in 1990. 

"They can happen pretty much anywhere" where stresses build up in the earth's crust, he said. 

Get the Chicago Tribune delivered to your home for only $1 a week >
Copyright 2010 Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.