254A, Notes 6: Gaussian ensembles
23 February, 2010 in math.CA, math.PR, math.AP, math.SP, math.RA, 254A - random matrices | Tags: GUE, determinantal processes, Hermite polynomials, method of steepest descent, ODE | by Terence Tao
Our study of random matrices, to date, has focused on somewhat general ensembles, such as iid random matrices or Wigner random matrices, in which the distribution of the individual entries of the matrices was essentially arbitrary (as long as certain moments, such as the mean and variance, were normalised). In these notes, we now focus on two much more special, and much more symmetric, ensembles:

The Gaussian Unitary Ensemble (GUE), which is an ensemble of random  Hermitian matrices  in which the upper-triangular entries are iid with distribution , and the diagonal entries are iid with distribution , and independent of the upper-triangular ones; and
The Gaussian random matrix ensemble, which is an ensemble of random  (non-Hermitian) matrices  whose entries are iid with distribution .
The symmetric nature of these ensembles will allow us to compute the spectral distribution by exact algebraic means, revealing a surprising connection with orthogonal polynomials and with determinantal processes. This will, for instance, recover the semi-circular law for GUE, but will also reveal fine spacing information, such as the distribution of the gap between adjacent eigenvalues, which is largely out of reach of tools such as the Stieltjes transform method and the moment method (although the moment method, with some effort, is able to control the extreme edges of the spectrum).

Similarly, we will see for the first time the circular law for eigenvalues of non-Hermitian matrices.

There are a number of other highly symmetric ensembles which can also be treated by the same methods, most notably the Gaussian Orthogonal Ensemble (GOE) and the Gaussian Symplectic Ensemble (GSE). However, for simplicity we shall focus just on the above two ensembles. For a systematic treatment of these ensembles, see the text by Deift.


— 1. The spectrum of GUE —

We have already shown using Dyson Brownian motion in Notes 3b that we have the Ginibre formula



for the density function of the eigenvalues  of a GUE matrix , where

 

is the Vandermonde determinant. We now give an alternate proof of this result (omitting the exact value of the normalising constant ) that exploits unitary invariance and the change of variables formula (the latter of which we shall do from first principles). The one thing to be careful about is that one has to somehow quotient out by the invariances of the problem before being able to apply the change of variables formula.

One approach here would be to artificially “fix a gauge” and work on some slice of the parameter space which is “transverse” to all the symmetries. With such an approach, one can use the classical change of variables formula. While this can certainly be done, we shall adopt a more “gauge-invariant” approach and carry the various invariances with us throughout the computation. (For a comparison of the two approaches, see this previous blog post.)

We turn to the details. Let  be the space of Hermitian  matrices, then the distribution  of a GUE matrix  is a absolutely continuous probability measure on , which can be written using the definition of GUE as



where  is Lebesgue measure on ,  are the coordinates of , and  is a normalisation constant (the exact value of which depends on how one normalises Lebesgue measure on ). We can express this more compactly as



Expressed this way, it is clear that the GUE ensemble is invariant under conjugations  by any unitary matrix.

Let  be the diagonal matrix whose entries  are the eigenvalues of  in descending order. Then we have  for some unitary matrix . The matirx  is not uniquely determined; if is diagonal unitary matrix, then  commutes with , and so one can freely replace  with . On the other hand, if the eigenvalues of  are simple, then the diagonal matrices are the only matrices that commute with , and so this freedom to right-multiply  by diagonal unitaries is the only failure of uniqueness here. And in any case, from the unitary invariance of GUE, we see that even after conditioning on , we may assume without loss of generality that  is drawn from the invariant Haar measure on . In particular,  and  can be taken to be independent.

Fix a diagonal matrix  for some , let  be extremely small, and let us compute the probability



that  lies within  of  in the Frobenius norm. On the one hand, the probability density of  is proportional to

 

near  (where we write ) and the volume of a ball of radius  in the -dimensional space  is proportional to , so (2) is equal to



for some constant  depending only on , where  goes to zero as  (keeping  and  fixed). On the other hand, if , then by the Weyl inequality (or Hoffman-Weilandt inequality) we have  (we allow implied constants here to depend on  and on ). This implies , thus . As a consequence we see that the off-diagonal elements of  are of size . We can thus use the inverse function theorem in this local region of parameter space and make the ansatz



where  is a bounded diagonal matrix,  is a diagonal unitary matrix, and is a bounded skew-adjoint matrix with zero diagonal. (Note here the emergence of the freedom to right-multiply  by diagonal unitaries.) Note that the map  has a non-degenerate Jacobian, so the inverse function theorem applies to uniquely specify  (and thus ) from  in this local region of parameter space.

Conversely, if  take the above form, then we can Taylor expand and conclude that



and so



We can thus bound (2) from above and below by expressions of the form



As  is distributed using Haar measure on ,  is (locally) distributed using  times a constant multiple of Lebesgue measure on the space  of skew-adjoint matrices with zero diagonal, which has dimension . Meanwhile,  is distributed using  times Lebesgue measure on the space of diagonal elements. Thus we can rewrite (4) as



where  and  denote Lebesgue measure and  depends only on .

Observe that the map  dilates the (complex-valued)  entry of  by , and so the Jacobian of this map is . Applying the change of variables, we can express the above as



The integral here is of the form  for some other constant . Comparing this formula with (3) we see that



for yet another constant . Sending  we recover an exact formula



when  is simple. Since almost all Hermitian matrices have simple spectrum (see Exercise 10 of Notes 3a), this gives the full spectral distribution of GUE, except for the issue of the unspecified constant.

Remark 1 In principle, this method should also recover the explicit normalising constant  in (1), but to do this it appears one needs to understand the volume of the fundamental domain of  with respect to the logarithm map, or equivalently to understand the volume of the unit ball of Hermitian matrices in the operator norm. I do not know of a simple way to compute this quantity (though it can be inferred from (1) and the above analysis). One can also recover the normalising constant through the machinery of determinantal processes, see below.

Remark 2 The above computation can be generalised to other -conjugation-invariant ensembles  whose probability distribution is of the form



for some potential function  (where we use the spectral theorem to define ), yielding a density function for the spectrum of the form



Given suitable regularity conditions on , one can then generalise many of the arguments in these notes to such ensembles. See this book by Deift for details.

— 2. The spectrum of gaussian matrices —

The above method also works for gaussian matrices , as was first observed by Dyson (though the final formula was first obtained by Ginibre, using a different method). Here, the density function is given by



where  is a constant and  is Lebesgue measure on the space  of all complex  matrices. This is invariant under both left and right multiplication by unitary matrices, so in particular is invariant under unitary conjugations as before.

This matrix  has  complex (generalised) eigenvalues , which are usually distinct:

Exercise 1 Let . Show that the space of matrices in with a repeated eigenvalue has codimension .

Unlike the Hermitian situation, though, there is no natural way to order these  complex eigenvalues. We will thus consider all  possible permutations at once, and define the spectral density function  of  by duality and the formula



for all test functions . By the Riesz representation theorem, this uniquely defines  (as a distribution, at least), although the total mass of  is rather than  due to the ambiguity in the spectrum.

Now we compute  (up to constants). In the Hermitian case, the key was to use the factorisation . This particular factorisation is of course unavailable in the non-Hermitian case. However, if the non-Hermitian matrix has simple spectrum, it can always be factored instead as , where  is unitary and  is upper triangular. Indeed, if one applies the Gram-Schmidt process to the eigenvectors of  and uses the resulting orthonormal basis to form , one easily verifies the desired factorisation. Note that the eigenvalues of  are the same as those of , which in turn are just the diagonal entries of .

Exercise 2 Show that this factorisation is also available when there are repeated eigenvalues. (Hint: use the Jordan normal form.)

To use this factorisation, we first have to understand how unique it is, at least in the generic case when there are no repeated eigenvalues. As noted above, if , then the diagonal entries of  form the same set as the eigenvalues of . We have the freedom to conjugate  by a permutation matrix  to obtain , and right-multiply  by  to counterbalance this conjugation; this permutes the diagonal entries of  around in any one of combinations.

Now suppose we fix the diagonal  of , which amounts to picking an ordering of the  eigenvalues of . The eigenvalues of  are , and furthermore for each , the eigenvector of  associated to lies in the span of the last  basis vectors  of , with a non-zero  coefficient (as can be seen by Gaussian elimination or Cramer’s rule). As  with  unitary, we conclude that for each , the  column of  lies in the span of the eigenvectors associated to . As these columns are orthonormal, they must thus arise from applying the Gram-Schmidt process to these eigenvectors (as discussed earlier). This argument also shows that once the diagonal entries of  are fixed, each column of  is determined up to rotation by a unit phase. In other words, the only remaining freedom is to replace  by  for some unit diagonal matrix , and then to replace  by  to counterbalance this change of .

To summarise, the factorisation  is unique up to right-multiplying  by permutation matrices and diagonal unitary matrices (which together generate the Weyl group of the unitary group ), and then conjugating by the same matrix. Given a matrix , we may apply these symmetries randomly, ending up with a random factorisation  such that the distribution of  is invariant under conjugation by permutation matrices and diagonal unitary matrices. Also, since  is itself invariant under unitary conjugations, we may also assume that  is distributed uniformly according to the Haar measure of , and independently of .

To summarise, the gaussian matrix ensemble  can almost surely be factorised as , where  is an upper-triangular matrix distributed according to some distribution



which is invariant with respect to conjugating  by permutation matrices or diagonal unitary matrices, and  is uniformly distributed according to the Haar measure of , independently of .

Now let  be an upper triangular matrix with complex entries whose entries  are distinct. As in the previous section, we consider the probability



On the one hand, since the space  of complex  matrices has real dimensions, we see from (9) that this expression is equal to



for some constant .

Now we compute (6) using the factorisation . Suppose that , so  As the eigenvalues of  are , which are assumed to be distinct, we see (from the inverse function theorem) that for  small enough,  has eigenvalues . Thus the diagonal entries of  are some permutation of . As we are assuming the distribution of  to be invariant under conjugation by permutation matrices, all permutations here are equally likely, so with probability , we may assume that the diagonal entries of  are given by  in that order. (The factor of  will eventually be absorbed into one of the unspecified constants.)

Let  be eigenvector of  associated to , then the Gram-Schmidt process applied to  (starting at  and working backwards to ) gives the standard basis  (in reverse order). By the inverse function theorem, we thus see that we have eigenvectors  of , which when the Gram-Schmidt process is applied, gives a perturbation  in reverse order. This gives a factorisation  in which , and hence . This is however not the most general factorisation available, even after fixing the diagonal entries of , due to the freedom to right-multiply  by diagonal unitary matrices . We thus see that the correct ansatz here is to have



for some diagonal unitary matrix .

In analogy with the GUE case, we can use the inverse function theorem make the more precise ansatz



where  is skew-Hermitian with zero diagonal and size ,  is diagonal unitary, and  is an upper triangular matrix of size . From the invariance  we see that  is distributed uniformly across all diagonal unitaries. Meanwhile, from the unitary conjugation invariance,  is distributed according to a constant multiple of  times Lebesgue measure  on the -dimensional space of skew Hermitian matrices with zero diagonal; and from the definition of ,  is distributed according to a constant multiple of the measure



where  is Lebesgue measure on the -dimensional space of upper-triangular matrices. Furthermore, the invariances ensure that the random variables  are distributed independently. Finally, we have



Thus we may rewrite (6) as



for some  (the  integration being absorbable into this constant ). We can Taylor expand



and so we can bound (8) above and below by expressions of the form



The Lebesgue measure  is invariant under translations by upper triangular matrices, so we may rewrite the above expression as



where  is the strictly lower triangular component of .

The next step is to make the (linear) change of variables . We check dimensions:  ranges in the space  of skew-adjoint Hermitian matrices with zero diagonal, which has dimension , as does the space of strictly lower-triangular matrices, which is where  ranges. So we can in principle make this change of variables, but we first have to compute the Jacobian of the transformation (and check that it is non-zero). For this, we switch to coordinates. Write  and . In coordinates, the equation  becomes



or equivalently



Thus for instance













etc. We then observe that the transformation matrix from  to  is triangular, with diagonal entries given by  for . The Jacobian of the (complex-linear) map is thus given by



which is non-zero by the hypothesis that the  are distinct. We may thus rewrite (9) as



where  is Lebesgue measure on strictly lower-triangular matrices. The integral here is equal to  for some constant . Comparing this with (6), cancelling the factor of , and sending , we obtain the formula



for some constant . We can expand



If we integrate out the off-diagonal variables  for , we see that the density function for the diagonal entries  of  is proportional to



Since these entries are a random permutation of the eigenvalues of , we conclude the Ginibre formula



for the joint density of the eigenvalues of a gaussian random matrix, where  is a constant.

Remark 3 Given that (1) can be derived using Dyson Brownian motion, it is natural to ask whether (10) can be derived by a similar method. It seems that in order to do this, one needs to consider a Dyson-like process not just on the eigenvalues , but on the entire triangular matrix  (or more precisely, on the moduli space formed by quotienting out the action of conjugation by unitary diagonal matrices). Unfortunately the computations seem to get somewhat complicated, and we do not present them here.

— 3. Mean field approximation —

We can use the formula (1) for the joint distribution to heuristically derive the semicircular law, as follows.

It is intuitively plausible that the spectrum  should concentrate in regions in which  is as large as possible. So it is now natural to ask how to optimise this function. Note that the expression in (1) is non-negative, and vanishes whenever two of the  collide, or when one or more of the  go off to infinity, so a maximum should exist away from these degenerate situations.

We may take logarithms and write



where  is a constant whose exact value is not of importance to us. From a mathematical physics perspective, one can interpret (11) as a Hamiltonian for  particles at positions , subject to a confining harmonic potential (these are the  terms) and a repulsive logarithmic potential between particles (these are the  terms).

Our objective is now to find a distribution of  that minimises this expression.

We know from previous notes that the  should be have magnitude . Let us then heuristically make a mean field approximation, in that we approximate the discrete spectral measure  by a continuous probability measure . (Secretly, we know from the semi-circular law that we should be able to take , but pretend that we do not know this fact yet.) Then we can heuristically approximate (11) as



and so we expect the distribution  to minimise the functional




One can compute the Euler-Lagrange equations of this functional:

Exercise 3 Working formally, and assuming that  is a probability measure that minimises (12), argue that



for some constant  and all  in the support of . For all  outside of the support, establish the inequality



There are various ways we can solve this equation for ; we sketch here a complex-analytic method. Differentiating in , we formally obtain



on the support of . But recall that if we let



be the Stieltjes transform of the probability measure , then we have



and



We conclude that



for all , which we rearrange as



This makes the function  entire (it is analytic in the upper half-plane, obeys the symmetry , and has no jump across the real line). On the other hand, as  as , goes to  at infinity. Applying Liouville’s theorem, we conclude that  is constant, thus we have the familiar equation



which can then be solved to obtain the semi-circular law as in previous notes.

Remark 4 Recall from Notes 3b that Dyson Brownian motion can be used to derive the formula (1). One can then interpret the Dyson Brownian motion proof of the semi-circular law for GUE in Notes 4 as a rigorous formalisation of the above mean field approximation heuristic argument.

One can perform a similar heuristic analysis for the spectral measure  of a random gaussian matrix, giving a description of the limiting density:

Exercise 4 Using heuristic arguments similar to those above, argue that should be close to a continuous probability distribution  obeying the equation



on the support of , for some constant , with the inequality



Using the Newton potential  for the fundamental solution of the two-dimensional Laplacian , conclude (non-rigorously) that  is equal to  on its support.

Also argue that  should be rotationally symmetric. Use (13) and Green’s formula to argue why the support of  should be simply connected, and then conclude (again non-rigorously) the circular law




We will see more rigorous derivations of the circular law later in these notes, and also in subsequent notes.

— 4. Determinantal form of the GUE spectral distribution —

In a previous section, we showed (up to constants) that the density function  for the eigenvalues  of GUE was given by the formula (1).

As is well known, the Vandermonde determinant  that appears in (1) can be expressed up to sign as a determinant of an  matrix, namely the matrix . Indeed, this determinant is clearly a polynomial of degree  in  which vanishes whenever two of the  agree, and the claim then follows from the factor theorem (and inspecting a single coefficient of the Vandermonde determinant, e.g. the  coefficient, to get the sign).

We can square the above fact (or more precisely, multiply the above matrix matrix by its adjoint) and conclude that  is the determinant of the matrix



More generally, if  are any sequence of polynomials, in which  has degree , then we see from row operations that the determinant of



is a non-zero constant multiple of  (with the constant depending on the leading coefficients of the ), and so the determinant of



is a non-zero constant multiple of . Comparing this with (1), we obtain the formula



for some non-zero constant .

This formula is valid for any choice of polynomials  of degree . But the formula is particularly useful when we set  equal to the (normalised) Hermite polynomials, defined by applying the Gram-Schmidt process in  to the polynomials  for  to yield . (Equivalently, the  are the orthogonal polynomials associated to the measure .) In that case, the expression



becomes the integral kernel of the orthogonal projection  operator in  to the span of the , thus

 

for all , and so  is now a constant multiple of



The reason for working with orthogonal polynomials is that we have the trace identity



and the reproducing formula



which reflects the identity . These two formulae have an important consequence:

Lemma 1 (Determinantal integration formula) Let  be any symmetric rapidly decreasing function obeying (16), (17). Then for any , one has




Remark 5 This remarkable identity is part of the beautiful algebraic theory of determinantal processes, which I discuss further in this blog post.

Proof: We induct on . When  this is just (16). Now assume that  and that the claim has already been proven for . We apply cofactor expansion to the bottom row of the determinant . This gives a principal term



plus a sum of  additional terms, the  term of which is of the form



Using (16), the principal term (19) gives a contribution of  to (18). For each nonprincipal term (20), we use the multilinearity of the determinant to absorb the  term into the  column of the matrix. Using (17), we thus see that the contribution of (20) to (18) can be simplified as

 

which after row exchange, simplifies to . The claim follows. 

In particular, if we iterate the above lemma using the Fubini-Tonelli theorem, we see that



On the other hand, if we extend the probability density function  symmetrically from the Weyl chamber  to all of , its integral is also . Since  is clearly symmetric in the , we can thus compare constants and conclude the Gaudin-Mehta formula



More generally, if we define  to be the function



then the above formula shows that  is the -point correlation function for the spectrum, in the sense that






for any test function .

In particular, if we set , we obtain the explicit formula



for the expected empirical spectral measure of . Equivalently after renormalising by , we have




It is thus of interest to understand the kernel  better.

To do this, we begin by recalling that the functions  were obtained from  by the Gram-Schmidt process. In particular, each  is orthogonal to the  for all . This implies that  is orthogonal to  for . On the other hand,  is a polynomial of degree , so  must lie in the span of  for . Combining the two facts, we see that must be a linear combination of , with the  coefficient being non-trivial. We rewrite this fact in the form



for some real numbers  (with ). Taking inner products with  and  we see that



and

 

and so



(with the convention ).

We will continue the computation of  later. For now, we we pick two distinct real numbers  and consider the Wronskian-type expression



Using (24), (26), we can write this as



or in other words





We telescope this and obtain the Christoffel-Darboux formula for the kernel (15):



Sending  using L’Hopital’s rule, we obtain in particular that




Inserting this into (23), we see that if we want to understand the expected spectral measure of GUE, we should understand the asymptotic behaviour of and the associated constants . For this, we need to exploit the specific properties of the gaussian weight . In particular, we have the identity



so upon integrating (25) by parts, we have

 

As  has degree at most , the first term vanishes by the orthonormal nature of the , thus



To compute this, let us denote the leading coefficient of  as . Then  is equal to plus lower-order terms, and so we have



On the other hand, by inspecting the  coefficient of (24) we have



Combining the two formulae (and making the sign convention that the  are always positive), we see that



and



Meanwhile, a direct computation shows that , and thus by induction



A similar method lets us compute the . Indeed, taking inner products of (24) with  and using orthonormality we have



which upon integrating by parts using (29) gives



As  is of degree strictly less than , the integral vanishes by orthonormality, thus . The identity (24) thus becomes Hermite recurrence relation



Another recurrence relation arises by considering the integral



On the one hand, as  has degree at most , this integral vanishes if  by orthonormality. On the other hand, integrating by parts using (29), we can write the integral as



If , then  has degree less than , so the integral again vanishes. Thus the integral is non-vanishing only when . Using (30), we conclude that



We can combine (32) with (31) to obtain the formula



which together with the initial condition  gives the explicit representation



for the Hermite polynomials. Thus, for instance, at  one sees from Taylor expansion that



when  is even, and



when  is odd.

In principle, the formula (33), together with (28), gives us an explicit description of the kernel  (and thus of , by (23)). However, to understand the asymptotic behaviour as , we would have to understand the asymptotic behaviour of  as , which is not immediately discernable by inspection. However, one can obtain such asymptotics by a variety of means. We give two such methods here: a method based on ODE analysis, and a complex-analytic method, based on the method of steepest descent.

We begin with the ODE method. Combining (31) with (32) we see that each polynomial  obeys the Hermite differential equation



If we look instead at the Hermite functions , we obtain the differential equation



where  is the harmonic oscillator operator



Note that the self-adjointness of  here is consistent with the orthogonal nature of the .

Exercise 5 Use (15), (28), (33), (31), (32) to establish the identities





and thus by (23)





It is thus natural to look at the rescaled functions



which are orthonormal in  and solve the equation



where  is the semiclassical harmonic oscillator operator



thus







The projection  is then the spectral projection operator of  to . According to semi-classical analysis, with  being interpreted as analogous to Planck’s constant, the operator  has symbol , where  is the momentum operator, so the projection  is a projection to the region  of phase space, or equivalently to the region . In the semi-classical limit , we thus expect the diagonal  of the normalised projection  to be proportional to the projection of this region to the variable, i.e. proportional to . We are thus led to the semi-circular law via semi-classical analysis.

It is possible to make the above argument rigorous, but this would require developing the theory of microlocal analysis, which would be overkill given that we are just dealing with an ODE rather than a PDE here (and an extremely classical ODE at that). We instead use a more basic semiclassical approximation, the WKB approximation, which we will make rigorous using the classical method of variation of parameters (one could also proceed using the closely related Prüfer transformation, which we will not detail here). We study the eigenfunction equation



where we think of  as being small, and  as being close to . We rewrite this as



where , where we will only work in the “classical” region  (so ) for now.

Recall that the general solution to the constant coefficient ODE  is given by . Inspired by this, we make the ansatz



where  is the antiderivative of . Differentiating this, we have





Because we are representing a single function  by two functions , we have the freedom to place an additional constraint on . Following the usual variation of parameters strategy, we will use this freedom to eliminate the last two terms in the expansion of , thus



We can now differentiate again and obtain





Comparing this with (37) we see that



Combining this with (38), we obtain equations of motion for  and :





We can simplify this using the integrating factor substitution



to obtain






The point of doing all these transformations is that the role of the  parameter no longer manifests itself through amplitude factors, and instead only is present in a phase factor. In particular, we have



on any compact interval  in the interior of the classical region  (where we allow implied constants to depend on ), which by Gronwall’s inequality gives the bounds



on this interval . We can then insert these bounds into (39), (40) again and integrate by parts (taking advantage of the non-stationary nature of ) to obtain the improved bounds



on this interval. (More precise asymptotic expansions can be obtained by iterating this procedure, but we will not need them here.) This is already enough to get the asymptotics that we need:

Exercise 6 Use (36) to Show that on any compact interval  in , the density of  is given by



where  are as above with  and . Combining this with (41), (34), (35), and Stirling’s formula, conclude that  converges in the vague topology to the semicircular law . (Note that once one gets convergence inside , the convergence outside of  can be obtained for free since  and  are both probability measures.

We now sketch out the approach using the method of steepest descent. The starting point is the Fourier inversion formula



which upon repeated differentiation gives



and thus by (33)



and thus



where



where we use a suitable branch of the complex logarithm to handle the case of negative .

The idea of the principle of steepest descent is to shift the contour of integration to where the real part of  is as small as possible. For this, it turns out that the stationary points of  play a crucial role. A brief calculation using the quadratic formula shows that there are two such stationary points, at



When ,  is purely imaginary at these stationary points, while for  the real part of  is negative at both points. One then draws a contour through these two stationary points in such a way that near each such point, the imaginary part of  is kept fixed, which keeps oscillation to a minimum and allows the real part to decay as steeply as possible (which explains the name of the method). After a certain tedious amount of computation, one obtains the same type of asymptotics for  that were obtained by the ODE method when  (and exponentially decaying estimates for ).

Exercise 7 Let ,  be functions which are analytic near a complex number , with  and . Let  be a small number, and let  be the line segment , where  is a complex phase such that  is a negative real. Show that for  sufficiently small, one has



as . This is the basic estimate behind the method of steepest descent; readers who are also familiar with the method of stationary phase may see a close parallel.

Remark 6 The method of steepest descent requires an explicit representation of the orthogonal polynomials as contour integrals, and as such is largely restricted to the classical orthogonal polynomials (such as the Hermite polynomials). However, there is a non-linear generalisation of the method of steepest descent developed by Deift and Zhou, in which one solves a matrix Riemann-Hilbert problem rather than a contour integral; see this book by Deift for details. Using these sorts of tools, one can generalise much of the above theory to the spectral distribution of -conjugation-invariant discussed in Remark 2, with the theory of Hermite polynomials being replaced by the more general theory of orthogonal polynomials; this is discussed in the above book of Deift, as well as the more recent book of Deift and Gioev.

The computations performed above for the diagonal kernel  can be summarised by the asymptotic



whenever  is fixed and , and  is the semi-circular law distribution. It is reasonably straightforward to generalise these asymptotics to the off-diagonal case as well, obtaining the more general result



for fixed  and , where  is the Dyson sine kernel



In the language of semi-classical analysis, what is going on here is that the rescaling in the left-hand side of (42) is transforming the phase space region to the region  in the limit , and the projection to the latter region is given by the Dyson sine kernel. A formal proof of (42) can be given by using either the ODE method or the steepest descent method to obtain asymptotics for Hermite polynomials, and thence (via the Christoffel-Darboux formula) to asymptotics for ; we do not give the details here, but see for instance the recent book of Anderson, Guionnet, and Zeitouni.

From (42) and (21), (22) we obtain the asymptotic formula







for the local statistics of eigenvalues. By means of further algebraic manipulations (using the general theory of determinantal processes), this allows one to control such quantities as the distribution of eigenvalue gaps near , normalised at the scale , which is the average size of these gaps as predicted by the semicircular law. For instance, for any , one can show (basically by the above formulae combined with the inclusion-exclusion principle) that the proportion of eigenvalues  with normalised gap  less than converges as  to , where  is defined by the formula , and  is the integral operator with kernel  (this operator can be verified to be trace class, so the determinant can be defined in a Fredholm sense). See for instance this book of Mehta (and my blog post on determinantal processes describe a finitary version of the inclusion-exclusion argument used to obtain such a result).

Remark 7 One can also analyse the distribution of the eigenvalues at the edge of the spectrum, i.e. close to . This ultimately hinges on understanding the behaviour of the projection  near the corners  of the phase space region , or of the Hermite polynomials  for  close to . For instance, by using steepest descent methods, one can show that



as  for any fixed , where  is the Airy function



This asymptotic and the Christoffel-Darboux formula then gives the asymptotic



for any fixed , where  is the Airy kernel



(Aside: Semiclassical heuristics suggest that the rescaled kernel (43) should correspond to projection to the parabolic region of phase space , but I do not know of a connection between this region and the Airy kernel; I am not sure whether semiclassical heuristics are in fact valid at this scaling regime. On the other hand, these heuristics do explain the emergence of the length scale  that emerges in (43), as this is the smallest scale at the edge which occupies a region in  consistent with the Heisenberg uncertainty principle.) This then gives an asymptotic description of the largest eigenvalues of a GUE matrix, which cluster in the region . For instance, one can use the above asymptotics to show that the largest eigenvalue  of a GUE matrix obeys the Tracy-Widom law



for any fixed , where  is the integral operator with kernel . See for instance the recent book of Anderson, Guionnet, and Zeitouni.

— 5. Determinantal form of the gaussian matrix distribution —

One can perform an analogous analysis of the joint distribution function (10) of gaussian random matrices. Indeed, given any family  of polynomials, with each of degree , much the same arguments as before show that (10) is equal to a constant multiple of



One can then select  to be orthonormal in . Actually in this case, the polynomials are very simple, being given explicitly by the formula



Exercise 8 Verify that the  are indeed orthonormal, and then conclude that (10) is equal to , where



Conclude further that the -point correlation functions  are given as



Exercise 9 Show that as , one has



and deduce that the expected spectral measure  converges vaguely to the circular measure ; this is a special case of the circular law.

Exercise 10 For any  and , show that



as . This formula (in principle, at least) describes the asymptotic local -point correlation functions of the spectrum of gaussian matrices.

Remark 8 One can use the above formulae as the starting point for many other computations on the spectrum of random gaussian matrices; to give just one example, one can show that expected number of eigenvalues which are real is of the order of  (see this paper of Edelman for more precise results of this nature). It remains a challenge to extend these results to more general ensembles than the gaussian ensemble.

8 commentsComments feed for this article
24 February, 2010 at 11:48 am
Anonymous


There’s a minor typo (“frac” should be “\frac”) in the statement of Exercise 9.

[Corrected, thanks - T.]

00  Rate This
Reply
26 February, 2010 at 6:49 pm
Anonymous


Dear Prof. Tao,

Thank you for the great post.

Which course are you going to teach next semester? If you give a hint, we can start to read related materials. your lecture notes are terrific but requires strong background.

Thanks

00  Rate This
Reply
5 March, 2010 at 1:47 pm
254A, Notes 7: The least singular value « What’s new

[...] of a gaussian random matrix can be computed explicitly by techniques similar to those employed in Notes 6. In particular, if is a real gaussian matrix (with all entries iid with distribution ), it was [...]
00  Rate This
Reply
9 August, 2010 at 10:31 am
Anonymous


In deriving the pdf for GUE, “We can thus use the inverse function theorem in this local region of parameter space and make the ansatz ….”

How is this true? Is there any reference to detailing this step?

00  Rate This
Reply
9 August, 2010 at 12:46 pm
Terence Tao


As stated immediately after that quote, one computes the Jacobian of at  (and  equal to a diagonal unitary) and verifies that it is non-zero. This already gives the desired parameterisation in the  neighbourhood of any diagonal unitary , from the inverse function theorem (it may be convenient here to scale out the  and look at the map  instead). Since we already know  lies within  of a diagonal unitary, the claim follows.

00  Rate This
Reply
23 October, 2010 at 12:57 pm
The Dyson and Airy kernels of GUE via semiclassical analysis « What’s new

[...] standard computation (given for instance in these lecture notes of mine) gives the Ginebre [...]
00  Rate This
Reply
4 December, 2010 at 10:44 pm
Anonymous


Dear Prof. Tao,
I don’t quite understand the argument after equation (20). You said you want to absorb K_n(x_l,x_{k+1}) into the l-th column. But isn’t the l-th column omitted in the matrix that follows? Maybe you meant the k+1th column? But I couldn’t figure out how to make it work.

[Corrected, thanks. The strategy is to get to the point where one can use the identity .]

00  Rate This
Reply
5 December, 2010 at 11:32 am
Anonymous


Ah I see. You are integrating  partially first. Thanks!