A proof of Gromov’s theorem
18 February, 2010 in expository, math.AP, math.GR | Tags: bruce kleiner, Gromov's theorem, harmonic functions, nilpotent groups, yehuda shalom | by Terence Tao
A celebrated theorem of Gromov reads:

Theorem 1 Every finitely generated group of polynomial growth is virtually nilpotent.

The original proof of Gromov’s theorem was quite non-elementary, using an infinitary limit and exploiting the work surrounding the solution to Hilbert’s fifth problem. More recently, Kleiner provided a proof which was more elementary (based in large part on an earlier paper of Colding and Minicozzi), though still not entirely so, relying in part on (a weak form of the) Tits alternative and also on an ultrafilter argument of Korevaar-Schoen and Mok. I discuss Kleiner’s argument more in this previous blog post.

Recently, Yehuda Shalom and I established a quantitative version of Gromov’s theorem by making every component of Kleiner’s argument finitary. Technically, this provides a fully elementary proof of Gromov’s theorem (we do use one infinitary limit to simplify the argument a little bit, but this is not truly necessary); however, because we were trying to quantify as much of the result as possible, the argument became quite lengthy.

In this note I want to record a short version of the argument of Yehuda and myself which is not quantitative, but gives a self-contained and largely elementary proof of Gromov’s theorem. The argument is not too far from the Kleiner argument, but has a number of simplifications at various places. In a number of places, there was a choice to take between a short argument that was “inefficient” in the sense that it did not lead to a good quantitative bound, and a lengthier argument which led to better quantitative bounds. I have opted for the former in all such cases.

Yehuda and I plan to write a short paper containing this argument as well as some additional material, but due to some interest in this particular proof, we are detailing it here on this blog in advance of our paper.

Note: this post will assume familiarity with the basic terminology of group theory, and will move somewhat quickly through the technical details.


— 1. Overview of argument —

The argument requires four separate ingredients. The first is the existence of non-trivial Lipschitz harmonic functions :

Theorem 2 (Existence of non-trivial Lipschitz harmonic functions) Let  be an infinite group generated by a finite symmetric set . Then there exists a non-constant function  which is harmonic in the sense that



for all , and Lipschitz in the sense that



for all  and , and some .

The second is that there are not too many such harmonic functions:

Theorem 3 (Kleiner’s theorem) Let  be a group of polynomial growth generated by a finite symmetric set  of generators. Then the vector space  of Lipschitz harmonic functions is finite-dimensional.

The third ingredient is that Gromov’s theorem is true in the compact linear Lie group case:

Theorem 4 (Gromov’s theorem in the compact Lie case) Let  be a finitely generated subgroup of a compact linear Lie group  of polynomial growth. Then  is virtually abelian.

The final ingredient is that Gromov’s theorem is inductively true once one can locate an infinite cyclic quotient:

Theorem 5 (Gromov’s theorem with an cyclic quotient) Let  be a finitely generated group which has polynomial growth of exponent at most  (i.e. the volume of a ball  grows like  for any fixed set of generators ). Suppose inductively that Gromov’s theorem is already known for groups of polynomial growth of exponent at most , and suppose that  contains a finite index subgroup  which can be mapped homomorphically onto an infinite cyclic group. Then  is virtually nilpotent.

We prove these four facts in later sections. For now, let us see how they combine to establish Gromov’s theorem in full generality.

We assume that  has polynomial growth of order , and assume inductively that Gromov’s theorem has already been established for growth of order or less. We fix a symmetric set  of generators.

We may assume that  is infinite otherwise we are already done. So by Theorem 2, the space  of (complex) Lipschitz harmonic functions consists of more than just the constants . In particular, setting , we have a non-trivial short exact sequence



The left translation action of  preserves the space of Lipschitz harmonic functions, and is thus an action of  on . Since  preserves constants, it is also an action of  on . Now, on , the homogeneous Lipschitz norm is a genuine norm, and is preserved by the action of . Since all norms are equivalent on a finite-dimensional space, we can place an arbitrary Euclidean structure on  and conclude that this structure is preserved up to constants by . So, the image of the action of  on  is precompact, and thus its closure is a compact Lie group. By Theorem 4, this image is virtually abelian. If it is infinite, then we thus see that a finite index subgroup of  has an infinite abelian image, and thus has a surjective homomorphism onto the integers, and we are done by Theorem 5. So we may assume that this image is finite; thus there is a finite index subgroup  of  that is trivial on . The action of  on  then collapses to the form  for some linear functional  (in fact  annihilates  and so comes from ). Note that  is then an additive representation of . If the image of this representation is infinite, then we are again done by Theorem 5, so we may assume that it is finite; thus there is a finite index subgroup  of  that is trivial on . In other words, all Lipschitz harmonic functions are -invariant, and thus take only finitely many values. But looking at the maximum such value and using harmonicity (i.e. using the maximum principle) we conclude that all Lipschitz harmonic functions are constant, a contradiction.

— 2. Building a Lipschitz harmonic function —

Now we prove Theorem 2. We introduce the function



where  is the Kronecker delta function. The property of a function  being harmonic is then simply that , using the discrete convolution structure on the group.

To build such a function, we consider the functions



where  is the convolution of  copies of . This sequence of functions is “asymptotically harmonic” in the sense that



but



(we allow implied constants to depend on ).

There are now two cases. The first case is the non-amenable case, when we have



for some , some , and infinitely many ; informally, this means that the averaged iterated convolutions  are not getting smoother as . By the duality of  and , we see that for each such  we can find  with  such that



But Young’s inequality,  has  norm of at most , and



Using the sequential Banach-Alaoglu theorem we may take a subsequence limit and obtain a non-trivial bounded harmonic function. Since bounded functions are automatically Lipschitz, and the claim follows.

The second case is the amenable case, when we have



as  for each . Setting , one soon verifies that



and



In particular



From this and the spectral theorem, we see that the positive-definite Laplacian operator  defined by the formula



has non-trivial spectrum at the origin. On the other hand, as  is infinite, there are no non-trivial harmonic functions in  (as can be seen from the maximum principle), and so the spectrum at the origin is not coming from a zero eigenfunction. From this and the spectral theorem (taking spectral projections to  for small ), one can find a sequence  of functions such that



but



as .

A summation by parts gives the Dirichlet energy identity



and thus



and also there exists  such that



for infinitely many . By the self-duality of , we may thus find a sequence  with  such that



for infinitely many . From Young’s inequality we also see that



(so  is uniformly Lipschitz) and



as , thus  is asymptotically harmonic. Using the Arzelá-Ascoli theorem to take another subsequence limit (after first subtracting a constant to normalise  to be zero at the identity, so that  becomes locally bounded by the uniform Lispchitz property) we obtain the required non-trivial Lipschitz harmonic function.

Remark 1 In the case of groups of polynomial growth, one can verify that one is always in the “amenable” case. In the non-amenable case, the theory of Poisson boundaries gives a plentiful supply of bounded Lipschitz harmonic functions (in fact, there is an infinite-dimensional space of such).

— 3. Kleiner’s theorem —

We now prove Theorem 3. Our proof will basically repeat those in Kleiner’s original paper. For simplicity, let us assume a stronger condition than polynomial growth, namely bounded doubling



for some fixed constant  and all . In general, polynomial growth does not obviously imply bounded doubling at all scales, but there is a simple pigeonhole argument that gives bounded doubling on most scales, and this turns out to be enough to run the argument below. But in order not to deal with the (minor) technicalities arising from exceptional scales in which bounded doubling fails, I will assume bounded doubling at all scales. The full proof in the general case can, of course, be found in Kleiner’s paper (which in turn was based upon an earlier argument of Colding and Minicozzi).

Let  be a small parameter. The key lemma is

Lemma 6 (Elliptic regularity) Cover  by balls  of radius . Suppose that a harmonic function  has mean zero on every such ball. Then one has



Let’s see how this lemma establishes the theorem. Consider some Lipschitz harmonic functions , which we normalise to all vanish at the identity. Let  be the space spanned by . For each , the  inner product gives a quadratic form  on . Using this quadratic form, we can build a Gram matrix determinant



From the Lipschitz nature of the harmonic functions, we have a bound of the form



as . On the other hand, we also have the monotonicity property



Now by bounded doubling, we can cover  by  balls of radius . This creates a codimension  subspace of  on which  is bounded by  times . Using this, we obtain the improved bound



For  small enough and  large enough, the rate of growth  is strictly less than . Iterating this estimate by doubling  off to infinity, and comparing against (1), we conclude in the limit that



for all , and so  cannot be linearly independent. This implies that the space of Lipschitz harmonic functions has dimension at most , and the claim follows.

It remains to prove the lemma. Fix the harmonic function .

There are two basic ingredients here. The first is the reverse Poincaré inequality



where



This claim (which heavily exploits the harmonicity of ) is proven by writing  as , multiplying by a suitable cutoff function adapted to  and equalling one on , and summing by parts; we omit the standard details. (The above inequality is in the general spirit of the philosophy that functions that are harmonic on a ball, should be smooth that ball.)

The second claim is the Poincaré inequality



which does not require harmonicity. To prove this claim, observe that the left-hand side can be bounded by



But by expanding each  as a word of length most  and using the triangle inequality in  and Cauchy-Schwarz, we have



and the claim follows.

If  has mean zero on , the Poincaré inequality implies that




To prove the lemma, we first use bounded doubling to refine the family of balls so that the triples  have bounded overlap. Applying (2) for each such ball and summing we obtain the claim.

— 4. The compact Lie case —

Now we prove Theorem 4. It is a classical fact that all compact linear Lie groups  are isomorphic to a subgroup of a unitary group ; indeed, if one takes the standard inner product on  and averages it by the Haar measure of , one obtains an inner product which is -invariant, and so  can be embedded inside the unitary group associated to this group. Thus it suffices to prove the claim when .

A key observation is that if two unitary elements  are close to the identity, then their commutator  is even closer to the identity. Indeed, since multiplication on the left or right by unitary elements does not affect the operator norm, we have





and so by the triangle inequality




We now need to exploit (3) to prove Theorem 4. As a warm-up, we first prove the following slightly easier classical result:

Theorem 7 (Jordan’s theorem) Let  be a finite subgroup of . Then  contains an abelian subgroup of index  (i.e. at most , where  depends only on ).

And indeed, the proof of the two results are very similar. Let us first prove Jordan’s theorem. We do this by induction on , the case  being trivial. Suppose first that  contains a central element  which is not a multiple of the identity. Then, by definition,  is contained in the centraliser  of , which by the spectral theorem is isomorphic to a product  of smaller unitary groups. Projecting  to each of these factor groups and applying the induction hypothesis, we obtain the claim.

Thus we may assume that  contains no central elements other than multiples of the identity. Now pick a small  (one could take  in fact) and consider the subgroup  of  generated by those elements of  that are within  of the identity (in the operator norm). By considering a maximal -net of  we see that  has index at most  in . By arguing as before, we may assume that  has no central elements other than multiples of the identity.

If  consists only of multiples of the identity, then we are done. If not, take an element  of  that is not a multiple of the identity, and which is as close as possible to the identity (here is where we use that  is finite). By (3), we see that if  is sufficiently small depending on , and if  is one of the generators of , then  lies in  and is closer to the identity than , and is thus a multiple of the identity. On the other hand,  has determinant . Given that it is so close to the identity, it must therefore be the identity (if  is small enough). In other words,  is central in , and is thus a multiple of the identity. But this contradicts the hypothesis that there are no central elements other than multiples of the identity, and we are done.

The proof of Theorem 4 is analogous. Again, we pick a small , and define  as before. If  has a central element that is not a multiple of the identity, then we can again argue via induction, so suppose that there are no such elements.

Being finitely generated, it is not difficult to show that  can be generated by a finite set  of generators within distance  of the identity. Now pick an element  which is not a multiple of the identity, and is at a distance  from the identity for some . We look at all the commutators  where . By (3), they are all at distance  from the identity, and have determinant . If they are all constant multiples of the identity, then by arguing as before we see that  is central in , a contradiction, so we can find an element  for some  which is a distance from the origin and is not a multiple of the identity. Continuing this, we can construct , etc., where each  is a distance  from the identity, and is a commutator of  with a generator.

Because of the lacunary nature of the distances of , we easily see that the words  with  are distinct for some small . On the other hand, all of these words lie in the ball of radius  generated by . This contradicts the polynomial growth hypothesis for  taken small enough and  large enough.

Remark 2 Theorem 4 can be deduced as a corollary of Gromov’s theorem, though we do not do so here as this would be circular. Indeed, it is not hard to see that the image of a torsion-free nilpotent group in a unitary group must be abelian.

— 5. The case of an infinite abelian quotient —

Now we prove Theorem 5 (which was already observed in Gromov’s original paper, and also closely related to earlier work of Milnor and of Wolf).

Since  is finitely generated and has polynomial growth of order , the finite index subgroup  is also finitely generated of growth . By hypothesis, there is a non-trivial homomorphism . Using the Euclidean algorithm, one can move the generators  of  around so that all but one of them, say , lie in the kernel of ; we thus see that this kernel must then be generated by  and their conjugates  by powers of .

Let  be the set of  for  and , and let  be the words of length at most generated by elements of . Observe that if at least the elements in  is not contained in , then  is at least twice as big as . Because of polynomial growth, this implies that  for some , which implies that  is generated by .

Observe that the ball of radius  generated by  is at least  times as large as the ball of radius  generated by . Since  has growth , we conclude that has growth at most , and is thus virtually nilpotent by hypothesis.

We have just seen that the  contains a nilpotent subgroup  of some finite index ; it is thus finitely generated. By splitting off the torsion group of  (and increasing  if necessary) we may take  to be torsion-free. From Lagrange’s theorem, we see that the group  generated by the powers  with  is then contained in  and is therefore torsion-free nilpotent.  is clearly a characteristic subgroup of , and is thus normal in . The group  is nilpotent and finitely generated with every element being of order , and is thus finite; thus  is finite index in . Since it is characteristic, it is in particular invariant under conjugation by . If one lets  be the group generated by  and , we see that is a finite index subgroup of . (Note that as  is not annihilated by , it will have infinite torsion even after quotienting out by .) In particular, it has polynomial growth.

To conclude, we need to show that  is virtually nilpotent. It will suffice to show that the conjugation action of  on  acts unipotently on  for some finite . We can induct on the step of the nilpotent group , assuming that the claim has already been proven for the quotient group  (where  is the centre of ), which has one lower step on . Thus it suffices to prove unipotence on just the center , which is a torsion-free finitely generated abelian group and thus isomorphic to some . Thus the conjugation action can be viewed as a matrix  in . Because  has polynomial growth, the powers  of  for  can only grow polynomially; in other words, all the eigenvalues of  have unit magnitude. On the other hand, these eigenvalues consist of Galois conjugacy classes of algebraic integers. But the only algebraic integers  whose Galois conjugacy classes all have unit magnitude are the roots of unity (Proof: the action of the on the ring  are uniformly bounded in  and must thus repeat itself due to the finite-dimensional nature of ). We conclude that all the eigenvalues of  are roots of unity, i.e. some power of  is unipotent, and the claim follows.

13 commentsComments feed for this article
19 February, 2010 at 6:56 am
DrDolittle


The statement of theorem 5 would be more legible, I think, if you replaced “infinite abelian group” by .
In the proof of theorem 5, I don’t see why  should generate the kernel – for example,  again is in the kernel.

10  Rate This
Reply
19 February, 2010 at 7:23 am
Ben Green


Terry,

Thanks for this. I think this proof can definitely be given in a graduate course now, and I intend to do so myself next academic year.

Best
Ben

30  Rate This
Reply
19 February, 2010 at 7:44 am
pavel zorin


Dear Mr. Tao,

a couple of comments regarding the proof of the existence of a Lipschitz harmonic function:

In the non-amenable case: g_n should be H_n and in the last paragraph, there is no need to appeal to the discreteness of G.

In the amenable case, I don’t quite see how does one arrive at ||F_n-F_n*δ_s||_{ℓ²}=O(n^{-½}): a direct calculation gives a bound in terms of ||f_n-f_n*δ_s||_{ℓ¹}, which has unknown decay (but is sufficient to conclude).

If I understand it right, at the end of the proof one chooses a convergent subsequence of H_n*G_n. How does one ensure ∞-boundedness of this sequence? The sequence G_n must go to infinity if ≡1.

regards, pavel

10  Rate This
Reply
19 February, 2010 at 7:46 am
pavel zorin


that is, (G_n, ΔG_n)≡1. (always forget that the “less” and “greater” signs are reserved symbols)

20  Rate This
Reply
19 February, 2010 at 8:51 am
Terence Tao


Thanks for the corrections!

20  Rate This
Reply
19 February, 2010 at 10:21 am
pavel zorin


Two more things: in the Dirichlet energy identity, there seems to be a 1/2 missing on the right.

Then, I don’t see which topology you would choose to apply Arzelà-Ascoli.

Instead, one could use the uniform Lipschitz condition to get pointwise boundedness and then select a pointwise convergent subsequence. The value of the Laplacian in a point is a continuous function of a finite amount of values of its argument and thus passes to the limit.

20  Rate This
Reply
19 February, 2010 at 11:42 am
Terence Tao


Thanks again for the correction.

I’m applying Arzela-Ascoli (for sigma-compact domains, and in the topology of locally uniform convergence) for the discrete group G. Of course, the proof of Arzela-Ascoli in this case is exactly as you describe, plus one application of diagonalisation. (I tend to lump all arguments that involve the Arzela-Ascoli diagonalisation trick under the category of Arzela-Ascoli type arguments, as a convenient shorthand.)

10  Rate This
Reply
20 February, 2010 at 9:00 pm
Boris Solomyak


Terry,

This is great timing, since Steffen Rohde and I are just now covering Gromov’s theorem in a graduate course in Seattle. I have a minor question:
isn’t it the case that the Poincare inequality in this blog should be “reverse Poncare” and vice versa?

Thanks!

[Corrected, thanks - T.]

20  Rate This
Reply
21 February, 2010 at 10:07 am
David Speyer


Some dumb questions about the amenable growth case in Theorem 2:

(1) I don’t understand the statement that, since  has nontrivial spectrum at the origin, there is a sequence  with  and .

Suppose  was a self-adjoint idempotent, such as . Then .

(2) In a possibly related issue, I don’t understand where you use that  is infinite.

40  Rate This
Reply
21 February, 2010 at 10:15 am
Terence Tao


Ah, thanks! Yes, the two issues are related. I forgot to mention that when G is infinite, there are no non-trivial harmonic functions in  (from the maximum principle), and so  has no eigenfunction at zero; the spectrum at zero must then be coming from something other than pure point spectrum at the origin (e.g. continuous spectrum, or a sequence of eigenvalues tending to zero but not actually zero). Now what one can do is take the functions  and spectrally project them to a small interval  near the origin, which upon normalisation will give the desired  thanks to the spectral theorem. (The absence of a zero eigenfunction is needed to ensure that we do not divide by zero when performing the normalisation.) I’ve changed the text accordingly.

40  Rate This
Reply
19 July, 2010 at 2:18 am
Gábor Pete


Dear Terry,

I seem to see a mistake in the penultimate paragraph. I’m probably wrong, because I see the same issue in Tits’ appendix to Gromov and in the Drutu-Kapovich lecture notes, but could you please help?

Why would the subgroup of G generated by N’ and e_m be the semidirect product given by conjugation by e_m? For instance, in the short exact sequence {0} –> {0,2} –> {0,1,2,3} –> {0,1} —> {0} of additive cyclic groups, {0,2} and 1 generate {0,1,2,3}, but conjugation by 1 is the trivial action on {0,2}, hence the semidirect product is a direct product \Z_2\times\Z_2, which is not the same as \Z_4.

If I were right, then the last paragraph, about the conjugations, would not apply.

Embarrassingly, I realized I didn’t understand this point during a lecture I was giving…

Thanks!

10  Rate This
Reply
19 July, 2010 at 8:34 am
Terence Tao


Because we are in the infinite quotient case,  has infinite order even after quotienting by N’ (recall that  annihilates N’ but not ), so the torsion obstruction indicated by your example does not arise. (To put it in fancier language, the base group here is  (as opposed to {0,1} in your example), which has a trivial first group cohomology.) I’ve modified the text to clarify this.

10  Rate This
Reply
19 July, 2010 at 11:24 am
Gábor Pete


Thanks! This was really dumb…